---
layout: single
title:  "2.&nbsp;History of Parallel Imaging"
date: 2023-03-27 19:54:40
categories: ParallelImaging
tag: PI
toc: true
author_profile: false
sidebar:
    nav: "docs"
#search: false # <- if this page is not wanted to be searched
---

## Parallel Imaging History

### 1.&nbsp;The first method started in k-space

##### &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Carlson recognized early that one could accelerate image acquisition using a combination of both phase-encoding gradients and RF coils to reconstruct an image. The method that he proposed worked directly in the k-space (or raw data) domain using a specifically constructed head coil, which generated a homogeneous sensitivity pattern in one channel of the coil, and a linear gradient in the other channel. Using this specifically designed coil array, their reconstruction method used a Fourier series expansion to reconstruct the unfolded image data directly in k-space. This method successfully reconstructed phan tom data as early as 1989 and in vivo reconstructions were acquired using this method as early as 1993. Unfortunately, an abstract containing these in vivo images was rejected from the SMRM in 1994, and these images remained relatively unknown until the 2004 Second International Workshop on Parallel Imaging in Zurich.

### 2.&nbsp;Early image-based methods

##### &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;After several people had proposed using RF coils to essentially encode the entire image along the phase-encoding direction, Kelton from the University of Illinois were the first to propose an image domain parallel imaging reconstruction in 1989 which used normal phase encoding in combination with partial RF coil encoding. This was accomplished by skipping some fraction of the normal phase-encoding steps followed by a matrix inversion to unalias the resulting images. Although the quality of the resulting reconstruction was not perfect this was the first image domain parallel imaging reconstruction in the modern sense of the term. Ra and Rim from the University of South Korea followed a few years later with a similar proposal which would work for cases when the reduc tion factor was less than the number of coils. Their technique was used in phantom experiments with good results, although as with Kelton et al. (1989), no in vivo data were obtained. A fundamental limitation of both of these studies was the lack of a robust method for determining the coil sensitivities needed for the reconstruction.

### 3.&nbsp;Why these early methods did not catch on?

##### &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;While any of these methods could have started the parallel imaging revolution, no one really “took up arms”, before the introduction of the SMASH method in 1997. In retrospect, this can be traced to several reasons, which are instructive to examine so that one can understand the important elements of modern parallel imaging methods, and why they are successful when previous methods were not. One of the primary reasons previous methods were not investigated further was actually the lack of scanners with multi-channel capability. Without this, parallel imaging is impossible. Another significant limitation was that most MRI scans at the time had low enough SNR that multiple averages had to be used, due to both the lack of an imaging array, but also due to ineffi cient sequences and suboptimal system electronics. In these cases, where SNR was the limiting factor, it was clearly easier to reduce the number of averages to save time compared with a complicated parallel imaging recon struction. Half-Fourier methods could also be used to gain another factor of two in imaging speed, which typically brought most sequences to the lower limit of acceptable SNR, so further reductions in imaging time were not feasible. These reasons hindered much of the work in this area, and left many important details unresolved. In particular, the lack of coil sensitivity mapping and the requirement of special coil arrays were signifi cant limitations that needed to be solved before the broad acceptance of the methods could be achieved. Unfortunately, all of these groups had effectively stopped working on parallel imaging methods by the mid 1990s because of these limitations.

### 4.&nbsp;SMASH and the Advent of Modern Parallel imaging Methods

##### &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Around the mid-1990s, however, MR scanner technology was starting to change. Four- and six-channel systems were becoming standard, and with them, multi-channel array coils and better imaging sequences and improved electronics had brought with them a large increase in SNR. By this point, averaging was not needed for many scans, and the time was ripe for a revival of parallel imaging concepts to accelerate image acquisition.
##### &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The method that kicked off the modern parallel imaging era was Simultaneous Acquisition of Spatial Harmonics, or SMASH, introduced at the ISMRM meeting in Vancouver in 1997 by Sodickson and Manning (1997) from Beth Israel Hospital in Boston. SMASH was the first technique to be successfully implemented in vivo and worked with a broad range of coil arrays. Taking an inspiration from his brother’s Ph.D. work on a generalized framework to describe k-space modulations (Sodickson and Cory 1998), Sodickson pro posed combining the signals from the different coils in the array to mimic the modulations (or spatial harmonics) that would normally be produced by a phase encoding gradient. These modulations then act like a retrospective phase-encoding gradient, which can effectively generate a line shifted in the phase-encoding direction. This k-space shifting effect of surface coils was noticed very early in MRI (Jesmanowicz et al. 1987); however, at that time, this effect was viewed more as a nuisance than as something useful. SMASH uses this shifting property in a beneficial way to recon struct missing lines in k-space.

### 5.&nbsp;SENSE and the Beginnings of Clinical Parallel Imaging

##### &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Later, in 1997, Pruessmann et al. from the ETH in Zurich proposed the SENSitivity Encoding (SENSE) method (1999). SENSE is essentially the completion of the original ideas of Kelton et al. (1989), and Ra and Rim (1993), with an SNR-optimized reconstruction along with a coil sensitivity mapping method ology that ensures that the process works robustly. Since the SENSE formalism was much more generalized than SMASH, and results in significantly higher SNR for low acceleration factors (Pruessmann et al. 1999; Sodickson et al. 1999), SENSE was the clear method of choice until the further development of the SMASH-like k-space methods. Even today the originally proposed SENSE method is still optimal in many areas of clinical imaging.

### 6.&nbsp;Auto-calibrating Methods

##### Much of the development in parallel imaging methods since has focused on increasing the performance of k space based methods and expanding the areas in which a SENSE-type reconstruction will work. A particularly interesting development in this regard is the class of auto-calibrating techniques which acquire the coil map along with the image acquisition. The auto-calibrating (AUTO-)SMASH technique proposed in 1998 by Jakob et al. (1998) also at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston was the first important technique in the area of auto-cali brated parallel imaging. AUTO-SMASH uses the acquisition of several additional lines to obtain essentially the same reconstruction as in SMASH, without the need for a complete coil map. This is especially important in areas of the body near the heart, for example, where pure coil sensitivity information is difficult to obtain. In addition, it can be used in cases where patient motion and/or image artefacts limit the acquisition of the coil map. This method was further extended by Heidemann et al. (2001) using the Variable Density AUTO-SMASH (VD-AUTO-SMASH) technique. In this technique, the extra lines that are acquired for calibration are reused in the final image reconstruction. This provides a variable density sampling scheme, since the center of the k-space is fully sampled, while the outer parts are acquired with reduced encoding. Heidemann et al. (2001) demonstrated that this reduced image artefacts in a dramatic way. In addition, it was determined that in most cases, for the same number of acquired lines (i.e., for the same acquisition time), it is better to sample the center as fully as possible, while sampling the outer parts as sparsely as possible.

### 7.&nbsp;Improved Hybrid Methods

##### &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Both of these methods allowed for the quick and robust acquisition of coil sensitivity information but were in general inaccurate for many general coil array geometries, resulting in image artefacts. Around this time, several other investigators recognized that one could improve the quality of k-space reconstructions by using more generalized combinations compared with the original SMASH method to perform the reconstruction. This included the hybrid methods of SPACE-RIP (Kyriakos et al. 2000), and generalized encoding matrix formulation (Sodickson and McKenzie 2001), as well as the generalized SMASH (Bydder et al. 2002a) method. All of these methods result in higher image quality than the original SMASH method, due to the more accurate reconstructions. In particular, the generalized SMASH method has found great use in parallel imaging-based artefact and motion-correction strategies, which are dis cussed in Chap. 5 (e.g. Bydder et al. 2003).

### 8.&nbsp;Improved k-Space Reconstructions with GRAPPA

##### &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Another further improvement in image quality resulted from the combination of autocalibration and these general image reconstructions with a separate reconstruction for each coil in the array. This method, Generalized Auto-calibrated Partially Parallel Acquisitions (GRAPPA), provided increased SNR compared with previous k-space reconstructions with the added robustness of an auto-calibrated coil sensitivity estimation (Griswold et al. 2002a). As a result, GRAPPA is one of the current standard metods along with SENSE for routine parallel imaging.

### 9.&nbsp;Optimized Dynamic Parallel Imaging Using TSENSE and TGRAPPA

##### &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For dynamic imaging, where a single position in the subject is imaged repeatedly, such as cine imaging in cardiac studies, very few methods can come close to the adaptive sensitivity encoding incorporating temporal filtering (T-SENSE) strategy proposed by Kellman et al. (2001). This method uses the interleaved sampling scheme found in the UNFOLD method (Madore et al. 1999) to determine the coil sensitivities to be used in a normal SENSE reconstruction. By sampling in this way, the coil sensitivity information can be updated every few frames, resulting in a high-quality, robust image acquisition. This basic method has recently been extended by Breuer et al. (2005a) to include a GRAPPA reconstruction , also with high-quality results.

### 10.&nbsp;Controlling the Aliasing for Better Image Quality: CAIPIRINHA

##### &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Another interesting concept also proposed by Breuer et al. (2005b) is the idea that one can control how the aliasing appears in the image reconstruction by changing the way in which the data is acquired. This method, Controlled Aliasing In Parallel Imaging Results IN Higher Accelerations (CAIPIRINHA) (Breuer et al. 2005), provides another tool to optimize the SNR of the final image reconstruction by using all of the potential encoding power of an imaging array simultaneously. This is accomplished through the use of either a specially modulated RF pulse or a modified phase-encoding table for 3D imaging. CAIPIRINHA has already been shown to result in a significant SNR increase in many areas of MRI and should be even more relevant with the advent of coil arrays with 32 or more channels.

### 11.&nbsp;Methods for Non-Cartesian Imaging

##### &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The final significant development that we briefly review here is the development of parallel imaging methods for non-Cartesian acquisitions, such as spiral and radial acquisitions. The first significant progress in this regard was the development of the practical generalized SENSE reconstruction (Pruessmann 1999). Without any special care, such a reconstruction would require so much computing power, that it could take weeks or more to reconstruct a single non-Cartesian acquisition. Independently Pruessmann et al. (2001) and Kannengiesser et al. (2000) proposed using the conjugate gradient method for a rapid solution to this problem. This method results in a practical image reconstruction time and high-quality image reconstructions. Recently, a further improvement in image reconstruction has been obtained using a blockwise GRAPPA reconstruction for both 1D variable density (Heidemann et al. 2003), radial (Griswold et al. 2003), and spiral (Heberlein et al. 2004; Heidemann et al. 2004) acquisitions. As in the case of standard non-Cartesian acquisitions, time will tell what applications these accelerated non Cartesian acquisitions will find in the clinical routine. One clear application will be in the area of fMRI data acquired using a spiral readout. This short history summary should make it clear that the development of parallel imaging methods has not happened overnight; however, at this point, several methods have been clearly established on clinical platforms, in particular the SENSE and GRAPPA methods. In the following, more detailed descriptions of these methods are given, followed by some of the emerging parallel imaging concepts. Unfortunately, much of the original literature describing these methods tends to be difficult to understand without a solid mathematical back ground. For this reason, the description given here will largely skip the mathematics and instead concentrate on a schematic description of the reconstructions. Those interested in the more mathematical aspects of the reconstructions should consult the original literature on these methods, or review articles such as (Blaimer et al. 2004), as well as recent workshop proceedings (Proc Second Int Workshop 2004).